[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well good evening everybody as
we get beginning this evening we are
going to delve into a pretty awesome
topic regarding one of the aspects of
leadership in the first church of
Jerusalem and the immediate areas as we
delve into the first church as the first
generation of the church kind of takes
off after the um the birth of the church
at Pentecost and the immediate expansion
Beyond there we're going to see a number
of aspects of the church in the coming
weeks here uh tonight we're going to be
looking at the first deacons and that is
especially we're going to focus in the
first two that are part of the seven uh
that the book of Acts tells us about and
that is by name step and Phillip now if
you're like me you mix up these guys a
little bit uh honestly you kind of
forget that Steven is a deacon first of
all and then uh like the early church
you tend to mix up Phillip with one of
the 12 disciples also named Phillip and
it is a common error but it is something
that I want to clarify tonight because
we have a lot to learn from these two
gentlemen and it's pretty remarkable
stories and uh tonight so we're going to
be looking into the first deacons Steven
and Phillip now I wanted to also let you
know next week excuse me next episode we
do these every other week next episode
is going to be focused on a concept of
leadership in the first church and then
how that uh through the apostolic time
morphed into the the two office setup of
Elders and deacons that we come to know
from places like uh 1 Timothy 3 and
Titus but when we are in the first
church while we still have the apostles
living and not preparing the church for
their departure um we have a specific
several types of offices and several of
them will show up and the reason I say
that is because we're going to be
tangentially interacting with a couple
of them here um Philip specifically is a
very unique character he not only fills
a role of Deacon he also becomes one of
the evangelists and then also his four
daughters are prophets
uh and so you can see there's very
difference uh between the very first
church and then the church that came
thereafter uh in the first church you
have all manner of things that have
since passed away um the apostolic
office the prophetic office um the uh
the Evangelistic office as as at least
as it is specifically expelled to us in
Ephesians 4 but we're going to be
dealing a lot with that next week so
when we run into them uh in this story
today I want you to be uh aware of the
fact that we're going to be looking into
that I'm not just glossing over it but I
do want to say uh this about the the
office of Deacon here at the very
beginning and this is I think why the
term Deacon itself is just born out of
the term to serve uh the office of
Deacon is not even an office per se uh
at the very beginning it is it starts
with a need and then that need is f
fulfilled by those who serve now
eventually they serve so well and they
fulfill that role so well that the
office by the time we get to 1 Timothy 3
is now codified with that name de uh
Deacon diakonos it is just servant one
who serves and so it's it's really
fascinating to see here at the beginning
with the first seven deacons um we're
going to be paying attention to the
first two here that are in the list
because that's what the book of Acts
focuses on we know very very little
about the other five
um but I wanted to express this because
it's one of my favorite little uh
sections of the book of Acts and uh it
certainly is the next thing uh in the
docket for us so let's kind of delve
into this uh realizing that the the
deacons assisted uh all the offices of
the church in a very specific way uh in
some sense but in other regards they are
probably the most broad application of
any singular uh well let's just say
Proto office that there is in the early
church and especially here in the first
church and you're going to see the breth
of what they do and what their role is
uh almost
immediately uh so one of the things that
I also want to point out here is that we
pay attention to Stephen and his
ministry and his role to Jerusalem we're
also going to pay attention to Phillip
and his role in Judea and Samaria and
also the uttermost parts of the world
it's a fascinating thing that Luke
writes into here as he gives these two
deacons a description and almost in them
and in their Ministry itself is is a
conglomerate of the uh of the uh Great
Commission that Jesus sent all of his
disciples out on and you'll we'll you'll
see what I mean it's really quite
amazing and so I don't want to oversell
it nor do I want to underrepresent it
but uh let's kind of get into this the
first deacons Stephen and
Phillip you know by the time we come to
1 Timothy 3 there's a whole list of
qualific ifications for this office but
at the very beginning it wasn't that way
in the first church before we ever get
to uh the apostles preparing the
churches for their departure uh and the
writing of scriptures and the codifying
of their teaching and Leadership into a
written form before all of that before 1
Timothy 3 and everything we have a
different and a much more um if you will
a much more condensed version of the
qualifications of those who who serve to
the church the ones who fill this role
of Deacon to the church the
qualifications according to this are
going to be found in Acts chapter 6 and
tonight you're going to need your Bibles
uh so grab Acts chapter 6-8 that's where
we're going to be this evening and we'll
pop over to acts 21 for a second there
at the end but we're going to be
spending our time in Acts 67 and
8 what are the qualifications well they
show up here at the very beginning right
in Acts chapter 6 The Scriptures say now
in those days when the disciples were
increasing in number a complaint by the
helist arose against the Hebrews because
their widows were being neglected in the
daily distribution now we had already
talked about the everything being held
in common the Jerusalem Church uh had
had a specific air about it where
everyone was so generous that they were
actually uh holding everything with open
hands if anyone in the church had any
need whatsoever they helped fulfill that
need without even thought of of it and
we saw the development of that even in
the very first chapters go from uh a a
reactive to a proactive type of alms
giving uh between chapters 2 and
chapters 5 it had already developed into
that well now we see with every single
institution or with every single change
that happens we see that there's
problems that arise here you have uh
greeking Jews that are Christians and
then Hebrew or Aramaic speaking Jews
that are Christians and and they have
different aspects or different places
that they go they speak different
languages yet they're in the same church
all still Jews but some speak Greek some
speak Hebrew or Aramaic and there seemed
to be a different either place that they
met or or whether the the specific
Gathering or an assembly that they
attended to um was using the Greek
translation of the Old Testament and
then the other ones would be using the
Hebrew uh of the Old Testament either
way what was going on is something was
happening where there was not a proper
administration of the of the alms that
were being brought in and so there was
neglect happening there was widows that
were being overlooked there was those
who were not able to uh to give freely
and so the 12 obviously the we have
already seen the church was growing in
Jerusalem by Leaps and Bounds where are
thousands and thousands of people in 12
men cannot oversee that
and so they see the immediate problem it
says and the twel summoned the full
number of the disciples and said it is
not right that we should give up
preaching the word of God to serve
tables uh specifically here the serving
of the tables of the daily distribution
this would be where not just money but
food and bread and uh and drink and
sustenance nourish anything to help
support anyone and specifically to the
widows that were in uh that were in the
city now this is still very very very
early on in the in the church's life and
history we are talking in the early 30s
um and depending on how you date the the
death of Christ let's just say within
the first year or so of Jesus's
resurrection and Ascension that's where
we kind of place ourselves and the 12
summon summoning the uh complete number
of the disciples that means the entire
church of Jerusalem came together to
decide this this was not something the
12 did and they and they just picked out
some they entrusted this to the entire
and it says very plainly the full number
of the disciples and they say to them
it's not right that we should give up
preaching the word of God to serve
tables therefore Brothers therefore
disciples therefore everyone pick out
from among you seven men of good
reputation first qualification full of
the spirit second qualification and full
of wisdom third qualification we will
appoint them to this
duty this is a really fascinating thing
I know it has been in Vogue a lot of
times um to talk about you know what
kind of decision-making capacity do the
uh disciples or the the average let's
say Church attender um or or um lay
Christian I I hate to use that
terminology but you know what I mean by
this what was their role as far as for
leadership or Direction in the church um
we're going to see throughout church
history that's actually quite
significant until it becomes not so but
here at the beginning you can already
see the disciples are not going to be
making the decision for the church they
are handing this excuse me let me make
it really clear the 12 are not making
this decision for the church in
Jerusalem the entirety the full number
of the disciples all the saved people in
the Church of Jerusalem come together
and choose among themselves seven men of
good reputation that are known for their
being full of the spirit and full of
wisdom and then the 12 will appoint them
to the duty of ensuring that the widows
are not neglected that there's a daily
distribution that is that is seen across
the board so that needs can be met not
the needs of a specific person or group
but needs across the board that requires
more people than just the 12 and so they
want seven now as far as the number of
seven I'm not going to get into any
reason for why that is I don't know if
there's seven different um whether
there's seven different Gatherings
inside Jerusalem uh of the church like
seven households that hold all of these
people together or what the case is we
don't know um I'm not I'm not a fan of
numerology I don't want to go into seven
is the number of completion and
Perfection or anything like that because
we obviously have more Deans coming all
the time um and and that wouldn't make
any sense here anyway but it may be
indicative of the fact that there uh uh
or excuse me it may be indicative of the
idea that there was seven uh large
assemblies inside the church of
Jerusalem that's possible or um who
knows we don't actually know but these
seven manner to be of having good
reputation full of the spirit full of
wisdom that's not a very expanded list
of qualifications that's actually quite
a
simplest and the 12 say but instead of
overseeing all of these some of the
administrative Affairs we will do uh
devote ourselves to prayer and to the
ministry of the
word right what they said then pleased
the whole Gathering again the entire
church of Jerusalem came together to do
this and the whole church the whole
Gathering the full number of the
disciples which would be in the
thousands and thousands at this point
all came together they chose Steven A
Man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit
and Phillip and procerus and nanor and
teon and parus and Nicholas a prate from
Antioch so these seven men are chosen to
alleviate the work of the disciples the
12 specific uh the apostles uh I'll use
that term kind of interchangeably here
by accident but when I say that I I do
mean the 12 they were meant to alleviate
the work of administrating of almsgiving
specifically to the church in Jerusalem
this is not somehow ordaining that all
of these uh this is the way that every
single city does it everywhere we don't
actually have that uh encouragement but
we do have this example uh and so that
becomes quite fascinating to us uh here
it says that the 12 uh Set uh excuse me
that the the disciples the church in
Jerusalem set before the apostles and
then the apostles prayed and laid their
hands on them and the word of God
continued to increase and the number of
the disciples meaning the number of
Christians multiplied greatly in
Jerusalem and a great many of the
priests even became obedient to the
faith uh boy that would be a fun one to
to study but I don't I don't have the
time uh and Stephen Full of Grace and
power was doing great wonders and signs
among the people now this is fascinating
because it immediately expands the role
of what in the world we're looking at
for Deacon because without these final
phrases and without the next several
chapters you'd almost think that the
deacons were here just to make the lives
of the Apostles the TW Apostles a little
bit easier uh and to make the church run
smoother to handle some of the
administrative tasks and I've seen a lot
of people that will take uh this section
here and leave off kind of verse eight
and the examples of Steven and Philip to
follow and just focus on this and say
the job of deacons is relegated only to
uh you know the administrative
tasks well that's not what the book of
Acts tells us that's not what the rest
of this tells us and in fact in the
exact same day and then the exact same
year as this expands out we see that the
role of a deacon is really complicated
to
explain we see just in these first two
guys in Stephen and in Philip ironically
we never actually even see them waiting
tables or handling the daily
distribution that that role of the the
very reason for which they are selected
is never even explained to us which
means their role went past even what is
going to be described but I want you to
see how complex the role of Deacon is
almost immediately now I don't want to
say that this is all part of the role of
a deacon just because somebody is a
deacon doesn't mean everything they do
is part of the office again we are
talking about the only two examples we
have of deacons in the early church or
excuse me in the first church I want to
be really really intentional about that
we only have these two
examples and it doesn't mean that every
single thing they do is then
automatically part of the office it's
the same thing for an apostle just
because an apostle does this doesn't
mean that's part of his office he's also
a you know a Christian on top of that
you know and not because he does
something doesn't mean that's part of
his role but there seems to be a very
intentional uh focus on these two guys
Stephen and Phillip here in the biblical
text and they are doing things that have
nothing to do with what they were just
commissioned
for it's kind of remarkable to us and so
uh I want to try to recreate the role of
the deacon in the first church and uh I
want to walk through these passages uh
with you and uh let's see it together
okay okay and one of the things that we
see is the the same pattern that we see
all through the book of Acts starting
with Jesus's own Ascension his promise
wait in Jerusalem you will be my
Witnesses from Jerusalem to Judea to
Samaria to the uttermost parts of the
world we see that obviously as the Holy
Spirit rolls out from Jerusalem Judea
Samaria and the uttermost parts of the
world we will see that uh if you read
through the book of Acts as the holy
spirit continues to work uh in that
manner but we will see it in microor
with step and with Phillip and so let's
see it the first things from
Jerusalem Stephen does not last long in
his role as a deacon we don't know
exactly how long but it does not seem to
last quite the
year um almost immediately a man such as
stepen who obviously had a reputation
for doing great wonders and signs among
the people people um the Jews at the
time were not happy with any of this uh
you can see it in the very next verse uh
there were some who belonged to the
synagogue of the fredman as it was
called and of the sirenians and of the
alexandrians and of those from cissa and
Asia rose up and disputed with stevenh
now I want to draw your attention to
something for a second his name is not
yet mentioned but almost certainly Saul
is a member of this specific synagogue
uh or of this group of synagogues um
because tsus where he is from is part of
the uh area here covered uh and then he
shows up here in the story of Steven
here uh as he is um
martyred let's read the story but they
could not withstand the wisdom in the
spirit with which he was speaking then
they secretly instigated men who said we
have heard him speak Blasphemous words
against Moses and God and they stirred
up the people and the elders and the
scribes and they came upon him and
seized him and brought him before the
council and they set up false Witnesses
who said this man never ceases to speak
words against this holy place and the
law for we have heard him say that this
Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this
place and will change the Customs that
Moses delivered to us and gazing at him
all who sat in the council saw that his
face was like the face of an
angel now the whole next chapter the
entire next chapter is built on a
description and actually a complete
account of what Stephen said to the
Sanhedrin is he was gathered together uh
these members uh some of those who
belonged to the synagogue of the fredman
uh those members brought him before the
Sanhedrin they accused him of these
things and one of the things that you
I'm sure are very familiar with his
story um he recounts the entire history
of the wanderings and of the promises of
Moses and uh and the law and all these
and then accuses them of uh what what
brings him to the end of his life which
is this idea that there was not a single
Prophet that you your fathers did
not um persecute in fact he says uh
there towards the end of chapter 7 you
stiff necked people uncircumcised in
hearts and ears you always resist the
Holy Spirit just as your fathers did so
do you which of the prophets did your
fathers not persecute and they killed
those who announced beforehand the
coming of the righteous one meaning
Jesus whom you have now betrayed and
murdered and who received the law is
delivered by angels and did not keep it
and of course this is after 50 verses of
him retelling the whole story and
everything like this but this was the
Lynch pin for the whole argument and it
says now uh when they heard these things
they were enraged and they ground their
teeth at him but he full of the Holy
Spirit gazed into heaven and saw the
glory of God and Jesus standing at the
right hand of God and he said behold I
see the heavens open and the son of man
standing at the right hand of God but
they cried out with a loud voice and
stopped their ears and rushed together
at him then they cast him out of the
city and stoned him and the witnesses
laid down their garments at the feet of
a young man named
Saul and as they were stoning Steven he
called out Lord Jesus receive my spirit
and follow falling to his knees he cried
out with a loud voice Lord do not hold
this sin against them and when he had
said this he fell
asleep Stephen's ministry as a deacon
did not have a very long tenure but the
impact and the Flash that it was uh in
Jerusalem set off a spark that caused
the gospel and the message of Jesus
Christ to go well past the walls of
Jerusalem the author of the book of Acts
wants us to know this that Steven not
only did not die in vain but that the
purpose of his martyrdom is self-evident
in how the spread from Jerusalem to the
rest of it depended on his very
martyrdom and the persecution that
followed in his uh in the wake of his
death we see in the very next verse in
Acts chap 8 verse1
as Saul approved of his execution and
there arose on that day a great
persecution against the church in
Jerusalem and they were all scattered
throughout the regions of look at this
Judea and Samaria except the apostles
devout men buried Steven and made great
lamentation over him but Saul was
ravaging the church and entering house
after house he dragged off men and women
and committed them to
prison now it is it is hard for us to
kind of follow timelines in the book of
Acts because he doesn't um Luke as much
as he is an amazing Theologian uh and an
amazing historian does not actually give
us all of the elements that we need for
this but in our best reconstructions
this persecution that Saul ravaged on
the church lasted for two maybe even
three years uh and you know we're we're
kind of you know how do you how do you
com uh how do you compartmentalize that
how do you understand that we we try to
reconstruct it best as we can but we
don't have real markers that we can buil
it off of but the best reconstructions
I've seen have shown that this
persecution lasted for about three years
and as far as this is concerned it had a
massive effect on the spread of the
Gospel now I am not a fan of saying the
blood of the martyrs is the seed of the
church um because there are places where
martyrdom leads to almost the entire
gospel witness being wiped out in
certain areas but I am a fan of
referring to a fan that's probably a bad
ter term to use here uh I am of the
opinion that martyrdom does assist in
the spread of the Gospel it does not
necessarily grow the church but it does
spread the gospel and here we see the
first time it
happens when we see Steven die we see
the persecution d uh drive off
Christians out of Jerusalem by the
thousands you will see the expansion
Beyond The Realm of Jerusalem and Judea
and even Samaria uh and you will see it
going Beyond there here in these early
days you see the expansion going Judea
and Samaria and then the people that go
bring the gospel with them these
Christians who leave Jerusalem because
of this persecution bring the gospel
with them wherever they
go I think it is important for us to
point out because there is often times a
an overl ification of martyrdom I do not
want to pull it down but what I do want
to do is Express that for those who take
their families and move away from where
there is martyrdom going on they have a
role in the spread of the Gospel
too because every single Christian and
whatever capacity they are
in has a purpose in the ministry of the
gospel of
Christ and as we see this Philip's life
really becomes part of this picture of
the spreading of the the the message of
the Gospel not just from Jerusalem but
to Judea and Samaria and to the ends of
the Earth so let's look at his
story when he
goes he leaves with everyone else from
Jerusalem verse 4 in chapter 8 says this
now those who were scattered went about
preaching the word I think that's the
most important part of all of this
Philip went down to the city of Samaria
or this or or a city of Samaria and
proclaimed to them the Christ here he
goes straight to Samaria now we're going
to see that he actually sets up shop in
Samaria long term but he starts by going
there he leaves Jerusalem when
persecution breaks out and goes to
Samaria and there he brings the word
with him there he proclaims Christ to
them and here's a fascinating
thing in history he is not referred to
as Philip the Deacon in fact almost
nobody knows him by that name people
know him him by the name Philip the
Evangelist because this is primarily
what he is known for this is primarily
what his story is about Steven is known
as Steven the Martyr Phillip Philip the
Evangelist and it says the response
there in Samaria was this the crowds
with one Accord paid attention to what
was being said by Phillip when they
heard him and saw the signs that he did
now he's working miracles as well for
unclean spirits now he's working
exorcisms crying out with a loud voice
came out of of many who had them and
many who were paralyzed or lame were
healed now he's healing
people and then the the summing up
statement there at the end of verse
eight so there was much joy in that
City it is a simply fascinating thing
that we see what the itinerate ministry
of Philip was when he left Jerusalem
does he stay as a deacon does he expand
his role as an evangelist or is this
part of the role of a deacon well
welcome to the difficulty of trying to
figure out what in the world was going
on uh but here Philip leaves I would say
most likely with the entire group that
he
oversaw whatever it was that his exact
role was in one of the Gatherings of
Jerusalem he left with them
they
supposedly um that group or at least
parts of it at least Philip and more uh
went down to the to a city of Samaria
and was proclaiming Christ there um it
seemed that he was interested in doing
this and we don't know which city we
don't know exactly what part of Samaria
but there was a great many things that
he was doing there that were Beyond any
role of a deacon that I would say would
be described in you know 1 Timothy 3 and
he's he's healing people lame paralyzed
he's doing exorcisms he's doing Miracles
um and he's proclaiming the word of God
uh kind of a remarkable story and then
we enter in a a
a fascinating story of of Simon the
Sorcerer now I'm not going to spend much
time with Simon the Sorcerer we're going
to be back here uh probably a little bit
later on um but uh I will just say just
take note as we pass by this story in
Acts
9-2 uh that um that Philip actually
baptizes
him right um You can see this part of
this story here um um there was a lot of
oh maybe I'll read a section of this
right let's start in verse 9 and and
then I'll just read as far as that
because you do need to pick that up here
there was a man named Simon who had
previously practiced magic in the city
and amazed the people of Samaria saying
that he himself was somebody great
that's usually a really bad sign if
somebody who's teaching you is teaching
them teaching you that they are the best
awesomeness uh they all paid attention
to him from the least to the greatest
saying this man is the power of God that
is called great and they paid attention
to him because for a long time he amazed
them he had amazed them with his magic
but when they believed Phillip as he
preached the good news about the kingdom
of God and in the name of Jesus Christ
they were baptized both men and women
okay so there is a massive part of
something that we don't usually see and
that is Philip the Deacon Philip the
Evangelist is out baptizing people both
men and women um and even Simon himself
believed and was uh and after being
baptized he continued with Phillip and
he saw many signs and great Miracles
performed he was amazed uh and then the
apostles at Jerusalem heard that Samaria
had received the word of God they sent
to them Peter and John now the reason
I'm going to leave this off is because
when we talk about Peter we're going to
spend a whole night on Peter um we're
going to be back in this passage and um
I don't want to pass by that so um let's
go ahead and Skip ahead to verse
26 this is the story that Philip is well
known for uh the Philip and the
Ethiopian Mich now I will say when I
grew up I got this mixed up with Philip
the Apostle as well I thought this was
um one of the one of the 12 and it's not
it is Philip uh the Evangelist Philip
the Deacon uh of the church in Jerusalem
that was an evangelist in
Samaria so this is an interesting thing
he is in Samaria and an angel of the
Lord comes in verse 26 and says Rise and
go toward the South to the road that
goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza this is
a desert place and so he rose and went
now that doesn't mean he's going from
Jerusalem to Gaza it means he's coming
from Samaria and coming down to the road
that goes from Jerusalem to Gaza and he
rose and went it says and then there was
an Ethiopian a unic a court official of
Candice Queen of the Ethiopians who is
in charge of all her treasure he had
come to Jerusalem to worship and was
returning seated in his Chariot as he
was reading the prophet Isaiah now okay
we got a lot of things going on here um
first thing
you will be my Witnesses from Jerusalem
to Judea to Samaria and the uttermost
parts of the earth here we have a
representative just randomly sprinkled
by Luke here on purpose uh of part of
the ends of the Earth a very distant
land compared to the speed at which you
travel here and a
god-fearer right a court official of
Queen Candace of the Ethiopians and he
personally owns
a copy of the book of
Isaiah I can't express to you how
expensive such a thing would be but we
see why because we understand that uh he
is he is the court official of Candace
Queen of the Ethiopians who is in charge
of all of her treasure um so what he's
holding and what he's capable of
personally on his own Chariot uh to just
read the prophet Isaiah on his own is
remarkable that's not a that is not a
simple thing to have hold of and the
spirit said to philli go over and join
his Chariot so Philip ran to him and
heard him reading Isaiah the prophet and
asked do you understand what you were
reading and he said how can I unless
someone guides me and he invited Philip
to come up and sit with him now the
passage of the scripture that he was
reading was this like a sheep he was led
to the slaughter and like a lamb before
it shears a silence so he opens not his
mouth in his humiliation Justice was
denied him who can describe his
generation for his life is taken away
from the Earth Earth unquote now if you
know your Old Testament you know and you
know the book of Isaiah you know he's
reading chapter 53 uh and also if you
know your Greek and your Hebrew you know
he is reading from the septent uh he
there's a there's a slight differences
here between the Hebrew and the Greek
and he is here reading the Greek version
uh which is not surprising uh it would
be strange for an Ethiopian to be
speaking or reading Hebrew so here he
has a section of the septent or or the
the the Greek translation of the Old
Testament that makes perfect sense um in
in Egypt is where a lot of the work for
the septent was done in the first
century uh as far as for preservation
and copying and so forth and so the idea
that somebody from Ethiopia has a copy
of this is not outlandish at all um it
would just take a good sum of money to
be able to procure this uh and the Unix
said to Philip about whom I ask you does
the prophet say this about himself or
about someone else and then Philip
opened his mouth and like all good
evangelism teaching Bible teaching Etc
he began with the scripture and he told
him the good news about Jesus the gospel
about Jesus and as they were going along
the road they came to some water and the
unic said see here is water now okay
obviously they were riding together for
a good long while because he's already
gotten up to repent and be baptized so
the story of the Fulfillment of Isaiah
the the ministry of Jesus Christ Christ
the signs the Wonders the words The
Works of Jesus Christ uh the the death
burial Resurrection Ascension and his
commissioning off to his Apostles I mean
that whole story has been recounted to
him now all the way up to go out into
all the world uh into all the nations
teaching them whatever I commanded you
baptizing them in the name of the father
Son and Holy Spirit and I will be with
you always and so he's already got into
this and unic is seems quite ecstatic
about this obvious ly has come to
repentance so this sentence here as they
were going along the road is a much
longer section of time I think than most
give it credit for uh and so all the way
he's gotten to this man has been
converted this man has been repentant
and then he's looking for water he wants
to be baptized he says see here is water
what prevents me from being baptized the
answer of course is nothing immediate
baptisms was always to be the way of
it and here Philip says to him he
commanded the Chariot to stop and they
both went down into the water Philip and
the unic and he baptized him they went
down they walked into the river he
baptized him immersion is what is being
depicted here there is nothing else
depicted in scripture doesn't mean it's
the only legitimate it just means that
that's what's going on
here when they came up out of the water
the spirit of the Lord carried philli
away now this if you're looking for the
book of Acts to be prescriptive and not
in many ways descriptive uh unless after
a baptism you you get translated
somewhere I'm going to go ahead and say
at least at some points it's a
descriptive text not a prescriptive but
there certainly are prescriptions in
here the Unix saw him no more and he
went on his way rejoicing now that's
just a wonderful uh happen stance of
evangelism what an incredible thing that
Philip got to be a part of there and
something that we never uh we never
really get to see with any normaly in
the history of the church but what an
incredible thing to be a part of philli
found himself in his zotus
now the road to jerus from Jerusalem to
Gaza is is several miles long and zotas
or modern day ashdod uh is several miles
from there as well and so you are
talking about an instant translation of
many miles um maybe Philip was asking
you know the spirit of the Lord way if
you if you could do that why'd you make
me run up to the Chariot in the first
place but as he uh it says as he passed
through he started with ashdod and then
he worked way his way through all of the
uh ashot if you're not familiar is right
on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea he
worked his way all the way up the sea
line uh all the way up and he preached
the gospel in all the towns until he
came to cesaria and cesaria is also
within you know Stone shot of the ocean
at this time and so he just went up the
entire coast and preached to every town
about Jesus Christ and the gospel and he
came to
cesaria now Acts chapter 8 will close
off
there
and if you're reading through the book
of Acts either like a a single sitting
or uh you know a couple of sittings or
whatnot if you read through the
scriptures you you lose kind of track of
how much time passes by by the time
philli shows up again in the text um if
you have your Bible turn turn all the
way to Acts chapter 21 I want you to see
something
here Philip in his later life is still
living in cesaria
we come to chapter 21:
7-10 and we find that now we are many
years later almost 30 years later we
find the Apostle Paul is returning back
from a missionary trip and he um he he
finishes The Voyage he arrives in tire
and uh and then he continues on to
cesaria and I want you to see here
because
watch what
happens when we had finished the voyage
this is Luke and Paul talking about this
now so this is again this is 30 years
after the Ethiopian unic we arrived in
tus and we greeted the brothers and
stayed with them for one day on the next
day we departed and we came to cesaria
we entered the house of Philip the
Evangelist who was one of the seven just
in case you're not clear that this is
the original uh or the OG Deacon right
and we stayed with him he had four
unmarried daughters who
prophesied while we were staying there
many days a prophet named agabus came
down from Judea now I'm going to leave
off the whole story of agabus because
when we talk about leadership here in
two weeks uh in the early church the the
whole teaching of prophets and their
role in the first church that's going to
be part of that so I'm going to leave
off some of this again we're going to
overlap several different times because
the book of Acts is very complicated but
Philip here is still living in cesaria
almost 30 years later and as it turns
out now whether he had these daughters
before when he was in Jerusalem and left
them in Samaria to go down to the
Ethiopian unic and whatnot we don't know
but most likely he got married after he
went to cesaria and he had four
daughters and all of them remained the
the word here is virgins they they were
unmarried they were virgin daughters and
they
prophesied uh what exactly they
prophesied we don't have any
recollection of that we don't have any
knowledge of that even in this text or
in Tradition but we do know this that
there was another Prophet there that
came down from Judea to meet Paul there
and give him a prophecy itself the
prophets had a very unique role uh in
the first church and uh we're going to
we're going to kind of see how that
works out here in the coming weeks but
uh that Phillip is still around 30 years
later uh he is since it seems since had
four daughters and they themselves are
prophets in the early church
um uh which is really really quite
fantastic um and we will look into that
a little bit more but I wanted you to
see that
so what happens to philli at the end of
his life is almost anyone's guess one of
the really problems is that I mentioned
at the very beginning is that it gets
really difficult because some church
Traditions uh some um some historical
accounts actually mix him up just with
the Apostle Phillip uh which you can see
why that is it's pretty easy to do but
he was not one of the 12 disciples he
was one of the seven deacons and um he
possibly moved to Asia Minor with his
daughters uh there are some Graves there
claiming to be U Philip's daughters um
now whether not that's true is
completely no way to verify that but
that people considered it uh kind of
opens our minds up to the possibility
that he moved to Asia Minor um there's
some people seems again they got it
mixed up but um could be hieropolis or
Ephesus or um yet another city in uh in
Western asiia minor but regardless of
such we don't have anything known to us
here in the text uh but he would have
been well along in years at this point I
mean if he was let's say in his mid-20s
let's just say at the earliest uh in the
uh in the in the church in Jerusalem 30
years later he's in his mid-50s and he's
got four daughters and living in cesaria
there doesn't leave much time um at
least at that point in history for
moving around Asia Minor and everything
else it's so we don't really know what's
going on and unfortunately there's a lot
of church Traditions that mix him up
with other people so uh we'll have to
leave him off there and so that
really kind of completes the story we
have Stephen we have Phillip we have the
first two deacons in the first church
explain to us what their lives look like
and they intersect with things that are
very not decony uh as far as the history
is concerned uh and so I wanted to try
to reconstruct at least in all the
descriptions that we have here of the
role of a deacon in the first church
because we don't have any indication
that Philip um uh stopped fulfilling his
role as a deacon until many years later
when we have his name told as Philip the
Evangelist one of the seven um still it
seems one of the seven now whether that
means he still fills that role or that
it's just trying to identify him as one
of those original Seven we don't really
know but we know he's also fulfilling
the role of an evangelist which was an
office or a group of people at the first
church and so um what exactly is going
on here is a little bit interesting
because it seems that he still carries
on his role of Deacon in the first
church uh not necessarily in Jerusalem
but in
cesaria and so what was the role of a
deacon what can we reconstruct of this
well what do we get from the book of
Acts from Steven and from Philip what
can we get from their stories as they
fulfilled the role of
deacons well first serving the community
of Believers and supporting the apostles
in whatever they needed whether that was
taking over alms giving or distribution
or oversight overseeing things or
Administration um or waiting of tables
whatever the case may be they're they're
they're a deep example of servant
leadership
um you both of them it seems are highly
selfless and very focused on the good of
the gospel and the spread of the Gospel
no matter what it personally costs them
we see them involved in evangelism both
of them before Philip is called Philip
the Evangelist that seems to be a
primary role of the first deacons which
is really interesting uh martyrdom
obviously Steven is the first martyr of
the church uh they are handling disputes
uh in the early church not leaving that
up to the apostles uh or the elders it
seems that they're they're uh as Elders
coming to the fry they're not there yet
uh in the first part uh assisting with
alms we talked about but preaching uh
you have both Stephen and philli doing
this Miracles you have both of them
doing Miracles uh Steven doesn't live
long enough really to do baptisms that
we're aware of but Philip does
tons uh and I'll simply point out he is
not an AP Apostle Bishop Elder ordained
minister any of that stuff he is a
deacon and he's doing tons of baptisms
everywhere um that should tell you
something about the first church and
what they thought about who could do
baptisms and for those who have a very
very stingy tradition on who's allowed
to do uh the sacrament of baptism uh i'
I'd encourage you to consider your ways
uh with regards to the story of Philip
um he not only baptizes the unic he
baptizes Simon the Magician and a lot of
the church in Samaria around Simon um
both men and women so I mean it's
interesting I obviously there's a lot of
development in baptism the years after
this men and women were not baptized
together uh and all sorts of stuff at
later times and you had to have all
sorts of you know someone's a bishop
someone's a um ordained priest PR or
whatever which priest is nowhere here in
the New Testament um but baptism done by
Deacon um put that one out there all
right teaching of the
scriptures that seems to be in part of
their role as well apologetics listen to
Steven's words listen to his recounting
and defense of the Gospel look at Philip
reasoning with Simon the Magician look
at look at how they preach about these
things they are involved in apologetics
they're involved in the teaching of the
scriptures opening of the word of of God
and that's just what we have recorded
about these two men who knows what else
they're involved in it's really an
amazing description of the first two
deacons and so what was the original
role of a deacon it seemed to be almost
as broad as you can
imagine they were serving the church
wherever the Gospel called them to and
for Stephen it called him to death in
Jerusalem for Philip it called him to
leave Jerusalem go to Samaria and then
go down to Gaza and then go to ashdod
and then go all the way up the coastline
all the way up to cesaria to assist in
the spreading of the Gospel beyond the
walls of Jerusalem as it went and
continued on from Jerusalem to Judea to
Samaria to the uttermost parts of the
world and that is a simply remarkable
thing about this story and why I wanted
to spend some time looking in detail at
the first deacons both Steven and
Phillip for one I'm very glad for both
of these men I'm glad for their EX
examples I hope
to live in light of their examples and
what they do stepen specifically and his
unwielding
um bravery boldness in the face of the
Sanhedrin which was the entire ruling
body of the Jewish people in Jerusalem
you have to be very very sure that what
you have seen and heard is true to be
able to do something like that and
nothing but respect for him for
Phillip remarkable man remarkable things
that were being done God uses him in a
very different way Steven is not better
than Phillip Philip is not better than
Steven both of them are part of God's
purpose for Steph it meant a life that
was cut short for Phillip he was able to
have a whole
family everyone has different places in
the Gospels
continuance into the
world one of the things that I I want us
to avoid is to ever look at one thing
and say because I'm in this role or this
person's in that role there's somebody
better there's somebody worse or
something better or something worse God
uses all of
us God uses all of us in all manner of
ways and I would encourage you to take
heart Philip is a remarkable example I
would encourage you to challenge
yourself uh with the the challenges that
come from Steven's mouth and his life
cut short and from Philip as well just
because one lives at a time of war and
one lives at a time of Peace does not
mean that somehow one is better or worse
than the other it means that God uses
his people wherever he places them and
glory is owed to him for these things as
you work through and and think through
these things I would encourage you to uh
continue reading the book of Acts as we
continue uh on two weeks from now we'll
be working through the first Church's
leadership structure which is very very
complicated uh involving Apostles and
evangelists and Prophets and obviously
deacons um and uh then we'll see how
that kind of uh pans out throughout the
scriptures uh after the first church the
Apostolic Church uh what kind of
authorities do we have in the in the
church to come
[Music]
[Applause]